Well, we are lucky enough to have Dr.
Thomas Seaffrey with us today. Um, thank
you so much for for coming on.
>> Oh, thank you very much. It's a nice
It's a pleasure to be here.
>> Good. I'm I'm glad. Pleasure is ours.
Um, I'd like to start with the rarity of
cancer. Um, over the course of human
history, cancer's been a rare disease.
Can you speak to how cancer previously
was a rare thing in the human world and
in the animal kingdom?
>> Yeah. Well, you know, um, uh, Tim No has
a book out, uh, that looks at looked at
cancer in Wales, um, uh, which is part
of the UK, of course. U, but in the
1800s,
uh, in the in Wales, cancer was not not
a prominent disorder. more of it was
lung lung involvement I think from the
coal industry and infections and and
this kind of thing and then they
re-evaluated the population in the 1990s
I believe
late 90s and cancer had moved into one
of the top spots. So clearly in about a
hundred years uh we uh the the the
disorder in that in that population
group uh increased significantly. Um the
humanitarian uh physician Albert
Schwitzer
uh also looked at African populations
uh for cancer back in the early 1900s
and um he saw he was surprised to see
such a low low incidence of cancer. As a
matter of fact, he looked at thousands
in examining he he was a physician
examining people for cancer and they
didn't have cancer. They had other
things, infections and other kinds of
ailments. He was out. This is really
remarkable. And the English explorers, I
think in in the Inouit population in
Canada also remarked about how
infrequent uh cancer was uh in these
populations. Um you know I I visited the
uh Thunder Bay Medical School some years
ago uh which is part of Canada and they
and they service uh the Inuit uh of
their country now and cancer was like
one of the major disorders along with
diabetes, heart disease, cardiovasc
so clearly uh we see uh a rise in cancer
that's clearly ly associated with the uh
western civilization diet and lifestyle.
As soon as that enters your population,
uh brace yourself for a barrage of
chronic diseases uh that come
predominantly with uh food, lack of
exercise. Um and I'm not discounting uh
increases in chemicals uh in in in the
food uh and air that we breathe. I I
think all of this comes together and
some people get cancer, some people get
cardiovascular disease, some people get
diabetes and there's an overlap overlap.
There's an obesity epidemic. Um and when
you look at animals um in the wild, one
of my students uh looked at the wolf uh
why wolves, you know, wolves die
predominantly from injuries and
infections. I I think this is in in the
wild and domestic dogs, cancer is the
number one killer of domestic dogs. All
dogs evolved uh were selected from the
genome of the wolf and they're and
they're eating the same crap food, no
exercise uh that the rest of us are
eating. Um you know, so when I if we go
back, we have no medical records from
our paleolithic ancestry, which would be
anywhere from 50 to 100 200,000 years
ago. our our ancestors were hunter
gatherers. So what would be killing most
of those folks would be what was killing
most of the animals in the wild which
would be injuries and infections. So
their life expectancy would be lower
because they didn't have antibiotics and
they didn't have orthopedic surgeons to
fix their fix their broken bones. Uh
today we have uh a whole array of
vaccines and antibiotics and things like
this and we have uh large numbers of
highly skilled orthopedic surgeons that
can fix broken bones and hips and all
the kinds of things that would have
debilitated us uh in the old days. But
what's killing us now are chronic
diseases and uh cancer being uh number
one of the one of the top ones. So it's
it's not a mystery uh what's going on
here. uh it's our diet and lifestyle
that's putting us at risk for all these
chronic diseases. And I and I think it's
surprising to me how little
understanding uh most folks have uh of
these concepts. Scientific illiteracy is
rampant in our societies. They have very
little understanding of anything. I
mean, I can't believe how many people
still think uh uh that the sun revolves
around the earth. I I I it's like what
the hell, man. Do you guys not know?
They have no clue about biological
evolution. Uh I mean, it's just like,
wow. And then we're wondering, oh, why
are you getting cancer? It's it's not a
mystery. We have a poorly educated uh
scientifically illiterate population.
>> Um
>> I think so. It's it's not a surprise.
>> I think there's a there's a parallel
between education and health of the
consensus view is it's outsourced. My
health is outsourced to my doctor. I
didn't think about it. my education is
outsourced to my school and university.
I don't really think about it. I think
that holds back um holds back progress
with with the diet and lifestyle piece
and you know if these problems are
exacerbated by poor diet and lifestyle.
What is it about poor diet and lifestyle
that then leads to cancer.
>> Okay. So what we know is we have to
understand what causes cancer. What is
what is the origin of disregulated cell
growth? That's that brings us back to
understanding why diet and lifestyle are
linked to the origin of cancer and and
other uh chronic diseases. Uh we can
speak specifically uh about cancer. Uh
all cancers that we have studied all
major cancers which represent over 97%
maybe even more um are are are using uh
energy without oxygen. So uh this comes
from a chronic disruption of oxidative
phosphorilation in the mitochondria of
of of cells. Now
let me let me break it down just a
little bit more for you. Um you know as
I said Warberg first described that uh
what what we have done is cleared up a
lot of the mistakes that Warberg made
and the misinterpretation of the cancer
field in not not fully understanding all
of this. Um but you know when we look at
tumors uh under the electron microscope
all the major cancers they have
abnormalities in the number and
structure of their of their mitochondria
and when you and when you uh look at
their function the mitochondrial
function is abnormal.
If you want to learn how to implement
the ketogenic diet and the press pulse
protocol into your cancer management,
just visit school.com/keto
forcancer, the new community by our
research analyst Johnny Rockermeer.
Within this new community platform, you
can connect with other patients and
learn from their experiences.
You can also just search through the
posts other members have already made.
You will have access to our classroom
section as well, which provides
practical advice and tools for the best
results. These sections cover all parts
of the press pulse protocol that you
should implement.
Starting with the general scientific
concepts by Dr. Thomas Ciphford, we will
show you how to start the ketogenic
diet, including which foods to choose
and which to avoid. Additionally, we
prepared a list of doctors specialized
in metabolic therapy as well as details
about glutamine inhibition and
hyperbaric oxygen protocols. So, take a
look around at school.com/ keto for
cancer.
Now, it doesn't happen overnight. As
Warberg said, if you critically damage
your mitochondria, it usually the cell
will die. uh but in the case of chronic
interruption of oxidative
phosphorilation in some population of
cells in some tissue over time the cell
has an opportunity to uh replace
oxidative phosphorilation with the
ancient pathways of substrate level
phosphorilation. Uh these are
fermentation pathways. Now these are the
same pathways that existed in our cells
prior to the oxygen entering into the
atmosphere 2 and a half billion years
ago. Um so you in order to understand
cancer you have to understand
evolutionary biology. You have to
understand that. If you don't understand
that then then you cannot understand
what I am saying. Um and believe me
there are very few people that really
understand evolutionary biology. So when
we look at cancer cells, they're just
simply falling back on these ancient
fermentation pathways that exist in
almost all of our cells but are are are
very minor. They prepare glucose for um
the molecule called pyuvate which is
fully oxidized in the mitochondria. But
if the mitochondria are not functional,
the pyuvate is reduced to lactic acid.
And the cells then in order to replace
the efficiency of oxidative
phosphorilation
h have to have a tre a large logistic
supply of fermentable fuels in the micro
environment. Now you also have to
realize
that the organel that controls the
destiny of our cells uh when to grow,
when not to grow, when to remain
quiescent that is the mitochondria. That
organel
controls the destiny of our cells. Um
cancer is cell division out of control.
Why why is this cell now out of control?
Because the organel that allows it to be
under control is corrupted. And the cell
is falling back on ancient fermentation
pathways because the organel that's
supposed to prevent that is now
dysfunctional. And the cell now requires
a large amount of fermentable fuel to
maintain a life. But the problem is the
life is no longer regulated. It's
disregulated. And you have to realize
based on the work of Albert Sorgi and
others the alpha period of life on earth
was hypoxic. There was no uh oxygen in
the atmosphere and all of the single
cell organisms at that time grew
unprololifer uh unbridled proliferation
driven by a fermentation metabolism.
cancer is doing nothing more than doing
that and it's driven by a fermentation
metabolism and then to so that's the
disease that's the disorder a
fermentation driven uh a group of cells
out of control because the organel
that's supposed to control them is no
longer capable of doing that.
>> So the modern our modern lifestyle harms
the mitochondria of the cell which then
causes it to flip to an ancient pathway
we have fermentation. Is that a that is
that some sort of redundant backup
mechanism much like we have two kidneys,
we have two eyes, two ears. Is this
fermentation?
>> Well, it's it's a default it's a default
mechanism. It's a default mechanism like
the the default state of cells is
proliferation not quiescent. The default
what it falls back on basically. So
oxidative phosphorilation is the evol
the newer evolved form of energy. Uh
fermentation originated was the first
form of energy because there was no
oxygen. So cancer cells can live without
oxygen. We've tested it ourselves. Let
me give you an example. We can grow
cancer cells in in extremely oxygen
depleted uh environments, extreme
hypoxia, and they grow fine. Um but the
one that everybody should know about is
cyanide. Cyanide is a poison that kills
you real quick. What cyanide does is it
binds to uh the cytochrome c oxidase
shuts down the electron transport chain
uh not allowing oxygen to accept
electrons and we die we die fast from
cyanide.
Cancer cells can live in cyanide it
because they don't use oxygen as a a
form of energy. So cancer and we
published this our big paper from last
week. We showed we clearly showed in
cyanide and hypoxia cancer cells are
still making energy ATP despite the fact
that they have no oxygen and they're in
presence of cyanide. That clearly tells
us that these damn cells are fermenting
to stay alive. So how do you kill them?
You have to take away the fermentation
fuels. Uh and that's the way you kill
cancer. You transition the whole body to
nutritional ketosis and then you come in
and simultaneously target the two
fermentable fuels. And this then puts us
on the path for health and recovery.
Yes, diet and lifestyle will damage
mitochondria and some population of
cells in some organ and you end up with
cancer. Um, you can have systemic
inflammation that comes from diabetes
and obesity and systemic inflammation
damages mitochondria and some population
of cells. intermittent hypoxia, chemical
carcinogens, ankcogenic viruses,
radiation, any of those exposures over
chronic time will damage oxidative
phosphorilation leading to a
compensatory uh fermentation. Uh so this
again we we collected we we we connected
all of the dots in this whole thing. We
have connected all of the dots how
cancer comes, how it starts, what it
goes through, and how it kills you.
Okay? Most of the time what's killing
you about 50% of the time is the
treatments they're using to manage the
cancer rather than the cancer itself.
It's one of the great tragedies of of
medicine.
>> Yes. I mean I've got some questions
around what standard of care does to
metabolic health down the line. But just
just before we get there, I'd love to
sort of go back upstream. So we have
dysregulation of the mitochondria which
causes this switch to fermentation. You
get a cancerous cell. What would the
consensus view say to what you just
said?
Um well they think cancer is a genetic
disease. Um the consensus view is that
cancer is a genetic disease and and all
of the mitochondrial abnormalities must
be coming from some gene mutations. Um
what we and others others have shown
clearly is that when you damage the
mitochondria or the mitochondria becomes
inefficient in using oxygen it it throws
out these radicals these oxygen radicals
uh the annionic uh the super oxide and
all these kinds of things um they cause
they're carcinogenic and mutagenic. So
the mutations in the nucleus are
actually downstream effects of the
damage to the oxidative phosphorilation
system. So and this is the a very bitter
bitter bitter pill uh for the field to
swallow um that the mutations are really
not the cause to the effects of this and
we have a problem. It's part of us being
human. human nature uh rejects uh when
when the brain has been indoctrinated to
think a certain way about a situation um
it it often is inca no longer capable of
rationally of rational thinking. uh
religion is like this. You know, when
people become indoctrinated into a
particular religion, they would rather
die than change their religion. Uh
because they have been the brain has
been so uh molded and indoctrinated, you
can't think anything other than what
you've been um brainwashed to think. Um
and um you have that and then you have
also
um you have confirmation bias where
because everybody says it must be this
way, it has to be that way. So you have
uh ideological dogmatic indoctrination
together with confirmation bias and
those two together uh make the brain
incapable of either understanding or
accepting what I'm saying even even when
they see the data uh they can't accept
it. So uh um and and and you know
eventually you have to have it replaced
because right now in the United States
we have 1,700 people a day dying from
cancer. Uh that's about 70 people per
hour. So we're going to let an
ideological dogma stop us uh from
helping these poor suffering people. So
what are we going to say to these guys,
these poor p people? I'm sorry. Uh we
cannot treat you with metabolic therapy
because of um confirmation bias and and
ideological dogma uh that cancer is a
genetic disease. So we have to radiate
and poison you to make you healthy and
do all these medieval kinds of
treatments because we cannot accept the
fact that cancer is something other than
we thought it was.
>> It's one of the great tragedies of the
times.
>> It's it's really something. The late
great Charlie Munger has a line on or
he's got a two two lines that come to
mind of the human mind works like a
human egg. When a sperm gets in it, it
shuts off. Right? And I think it's the
same with these ideas. When you get
these grand narratives in, they shut off
to anything else. And the other line he
he had which is is relevant to our
discussion here is it it's super hard to
have a non-conensus view in the world
and uh be there touting this when the
herd is going the other way and it takes
a special um a special amount of
gumption to do that. Um I know you
you've been champing this for years,
right? I mean you've been met with a
load of push back and now you've been
proved right. How have you ignore it? I
don't think they give us push back. I I
I think both this is what they always
do. They ignore it. Um they just don't
discuss it. And then when you talk to
people, no, they say, you know, it's not
right. But I said, have you looked at
and read the literature? Have you
actually looked at the data? Oh, no. No.
I I just go with what everybody says.
Okay. So, and and we're still writing
enormous papers published in top
journals hunting hunting for the genes
that cause cancer. Um this is a feudal
uh effort. this is absurd um to do this.
Uh and they always grab if you look at
these papers, they've got like 50 50
authors on the paper hunting for some
damn gene that never that doesn't exist.
Um so we have found papers in the
scientific literature that show some
cancers have no mutations. They they've
been looking. So the somatic mutation
theory of cancer, this is the current
the theory of cancer is cancer caused by
mutations in the nucleus. uh these are
called somatic mutations. Okay. So they
they are co they cause the the cancer.
So we have we have found papers uh where
there's no mutations and it's very
interesting the authors of those papers
even ignore their own findings. Say you
would think that if you saw a a tumor
with no mutations you'd have to say whoa
uh we should discuss this a little bit
more in light of our current theory. No.
All those papers ignored it. They didn't
say anything about the theory under
which they're working. So then they
reclassified mutations realizing that
some of them don't do anything and
they're just there. But the really
important ones are the so-called driver
mutations. So this was pointed out by
Dr. Vocalstein at the John's Hopkins
that we we we have these other kinds of
mutations that are really the ones that
lead to disregulated growth and they're
called drivers as opposed to passengers.
Well, we have different now categories
of mutations. So the new findings coming
out of the scientific literature over
the last few years is that our normal
cells are full of these driver mutations
even in the p-53. Everybody loves p-53
this you know uh t you know p-53
cytochrome coxidase synthace it's they
always like oh p-53 p-53 we have dozens
dozens of mutations in our p-53 genes in
normal tissues that have no no
disregulated cell growth. So, how you
explain this? How you explain cancers
that have no mutations and normal cells
loaded with driver mutations that don't
have disregulated growth? And then you
throw in the nuclear mitochondrial
transfer experiments on top of all this
showing that the nucleus of a tumor cell
placed into a normal cytoplasm has
regulated growth. And if I take the
nucleus of a normal cell and put it into
a tumor cytoplasm, it has disregulated
growth. All of this evidence says it
can't be a genetic disease. So what are
you doing? Why don't you read the
literature? Why don't you understand
this? And people say, "Well, if it were
important, people would have repeated
it." I said, "It's been repeated dozens
and dozens of times. You just choose not
to not to acknowledge it. What are you
going to do?" You know, it's like grab
the guy's head and smash his face into
the data and say, "Listen, read a
jackass and you'll come to understand
what's going on here." You know,
>> I definitely it's really frustrating.
It's amazing. And then when they realize
it's only a matter of time, they're
going to realize what what I'm saying
and they're going to look at the data.
Oh, yeah. It was obvious all along. Oh,
yeah. Right. Well, I'm telling you, it
wasn't obvious all along.
>> Yeah. What is it? The stars look obvious
in uh in hindsight, right? But what
would you say to what would you say to
people who are concerned or have been
told about the Bracka gene and breast
cancer and it's seen as a bit of a death
sentence. How does the metabolic of
cancer reframe the BA mutation if at
all?
>> Well, the Bracka mutation when you look
at all the all those are germline those
are germline mutations now. They're not
somatic mutations. Somatic mutations are
not linked to the germ line. Then you
have germline risk factors. They're
called risk factors. genetic germline
risk factors. When you look at BA 1,
what does Brackco one do? It damages the
efficiency of the mitochondria.
So, uh clearly it's linked P and the
leaf many, which is the p-53 um germline
mutation. That's about 90% penetrint,
meaning 90% of the people that have that
gene will go on to develop some form of
cancer in their lifetime. But 10% don't.
Uh no, no germline mutation is 100%
penetrint, meaning it's a risk factor.
what we have but no cancer has been
found with normal number structure and
function of mitochondria. So the that
the mitochondria is the prime cause of
all all cancers but that can happen from
germline mutations like BA it can happen
from p-53 retinol blasto there's a whole
slug of these uh risk germline risk
factors um but if you know that all of
them in one way or another damage
oxidative phosphorilation leading to a
compensatory substrate level
phosphorilation we know how to change
our diet and lifestyle to reduce the
risk of those cancer. Now like in the
case of the actress Angelina Jolie, she
had her breasts and ovaries removed or
something as a prophylactic uh and other
women do the same thing and and uh they
feel that if I cut off the organs that
are going to lead to this uh but then
but that doesn't guarantee that there
won't be other uh parts of your body
that later on develop. So if you
understand that it's a mitochondrial
metabolic disease and if you keep your
mitochondria healthy the probability of
getting cancer is significantly reduced
then you might want to embrace metab a
metabolic lifestyle to uh reduce the
risk rather than have yourself
surgically mutilated. Um, you know,
there's choices. People have choices.
When they understand the facts and the
data, they can have they can make
choices. And that's the thing. Okay, you
can still have your be surgically
mutilated and still go on the metabolic
therapy. I mean, there's a lot of
variations back or for back and forth
for this whole thing. But at least
people should be under know what the
hell is going on so they can make an
informed choice about about their plans.
>> Okay? So, it's not a genetic disease.
It's a disease of the mitochondria and
the meta and the metabolism of the cell.
Um, how does that implement how does
that change our approach of dealing with
cancer as it as it relates to how we cut
off its fuel?
>> Well, I mean we have two things here.
The interesting thing about u metabolic
therapy uh and recognizing cancer as a
mitochondrial metabolic disease is that
not only can you use an approach to
prevent cancer uh so if you keep your
mitochondria healthy with diet lifestyle
changes you can significantly reduce the
risk of getting cancer but let's be
honest most members of our western
societies regard regardless of where
they're in the UK uh the United States
Germany
Japan, most people most people uh roll
the dice and say, "Well, I'll deal with
it when I get it." So, that's that's
what most people have to deal with is is
when they're finally diagnosed with
cancer, how do they manage the cancer?
So, um how do they manage disregulated
cell growth? And and that big paper we
we came out with uh last week uh fleshes
out in a very great detail what options
we have to manage cancer when when we
get it. It was based on our press pulse
uh therapeutic strategy. You know, I
wrote the press pulse therapeutic
strategy with some clinician colleagues
and Dominic D. Augustino.
So, uh that was the framework. It it
wasn't fleshed out. It was the
scientific uh framework for what you
would need to do uh uh to manage cancer.
Um but now we have a much more fleshed
out protocol uh for for doing this and
there's many many options. Clearly if
the tumor cell can't grow without
ferment fermental fermentation
metabolism then the strategy is to uh
restrict the availability of the fuels
uh driving the fermentation metabolism
and that becomes the sugar glucose and
the amino acid glutamine. Um
uh as I said we can we can press down
glutamine with with diets and we have to
pulse the corre correction. We can press
down glucose and we can pulse the
glutamine. But we do this when the when
the body is transitioned over to uh
nutritional ketosis, therapeutic
ketosis. And we we also built here at
Boston College the glucose ketone index
calculator which has now been put into
these uh devices um that will allow
people to know when they're in
nutritional ketosis quantitatively.
So there's no guesswork on this. Um and
then and then you come in with drugs um
that will target glutamine while the
body is in nutritional ketosis with low
glucose elevated ketones. And uh the
cutting edge right now is dosage timing
and scheduling. Uh we we have not yet
perfected uh all of the ways in which we
can dose time and schedule the the
different parts of metabolic therapies.
That's the future right now. But we also
don't exclude uh parts of the standards
of care. Uh we can significantly reduce
toxicity of radiation and chemo uh when
you're in nutritional ketosis. we can
actually lower dosages significantly and
still maintain some therapeutic efficacy
of these toxic drugs. Um, in particular
imunotherapies, you know, everybody's
jumping up and down about these
imunotherapies. You know, they're based
on the sematic mutation theory. So, by
by themselves, they will never be
optimal for managing most cancers.
However, what it's very interesting, you
know, they say, well, imunotherapies
can't work well on solid tumors because
of the acidification in the tumor micro
environment.
So, this is this, let me tell you,
that's how crazy it is. So, what's
causing the acidification in the micro
environment is the is the is the waste
products of glucose and glutamine
fermentation.
The waste products are lactic acid and
suinic acid. These are the acidified
waste products of the tumor cells. And
everybody's trying to figure out uh how
we break through the acidification of
the micro environment to allow
imunotherapies to work. For Christ's
sake, pull out the glucose and glutamine
and now your iminotherapies will
probably have a much greater effect. So
it's it's like I don't understand. Don't
they read the literature? Don't they
understand what the hell is going on
here? I mean, we can make all of these
approaches for cancer so much more
effective and efficient if they simply
understand this is a mitochondrial
metabolic disease driven by a
fermentation metabolism. It's
unbelievable.
>> I'll tell you what's going on here in
the UK and you probably know it already,
but say if someone has cancer in the UK,
they would even if they've read the
papers, they trust the judgment of the
do if they're not medically trained,
they trust the judgment of the doctor
over their own ability to read the paper
if they're not from a scientific
background. So, they could be
well-intentioned and read on all the
literature, but they go into an oncology
ward and say, "Okay, I appreciate you
put me on chemo and radio for my cancer
I have. I want to implement the
ketogenic diet. I want to do uh the
pulse press strategy. I've I've figured
out a way to get some uh glutamine
blockers. What do you think? And they're
met with a response which is completely
negative because a it's I don't
recommend that. Hasn't been studied. Or
I have no idea what you're talking
about. What do you say to people who are
in that situation?
Well, it's like the blind leading the
blind, right? I mean, you you go to you
go to it's terrible, right? you go to
the guy who was supposed to know what he
has no clue and it's really embarrassing
and um yeah but that has to change. Uh
you have to educate these guys. They're
not stupid people. They just lack
knowledge. So uh um obviously they got
to a position in their life where they
they they think they know something and
in many parts of medicine that's true. I
mean as I said orthopedic medicine and
cardiovascular heart replacements all
this kind of stuff. I mean this is
unbelievable stuff. But when it comes to
cancer they're in the stone age. they
have no clue what's going on. So, uh um
they have to be re-educated and the
patients uh have to be knowledgeable as
well because met mitochondrial metabolic
therapy requires a very strong
participation of the patient. So, the
patient really needs to know what's
going on and be
uh uh compliant uh with the with the
recommendations of the oncologist. Um,
but if the oncologist has has no clue
what's going on, it's a very frustrating
situation because sometimes the patients
know more than the oncologist. The
patients, so what what we do is, you
know, eventually it's going to have to
come, but I like the patient just brings
in the plan and says, "Here, do give
this to you you give me the the
glutamine targeting drugs at this
dosage." You're telling, but you it
would be more important for the
oncologist to know what dosage and
timing and scheduling he should do. He
should do. Why should the patient have
to tell the the the professional what to
do? Um
>> yes.
>> So it clear and this is the great
tragedy. The the problem is the poor
guys in all and the all the all over the
world. I I've never seen anything like
it. In India, China, Japan, Germany, UK,
United States, Brazil, they're all doing
the same same thing. They have no clue
what what's causing cancer, how it's
managed or anything. So we have to have
a I don't know how would we do this? We
have to retrain uh we have to
re-educate. Uh bottom line is there's a
a tremendous
uh um u uh desire on the part of the
patients to have this because they're
being slaughtered with the current the
therapies. You know they're being
brutalized. I mean even the sp the guys
who ran the Spanish Inquisition would be
impressed on how we torture uh cancer
patients. you know, um, this is just the
hair falls out, the gums are bleeding,
blowing the your microbiome to pieces. I
mean, this is nuts. You don't have to do
all this stuff to get managed cancer.
Yet, this is what we're doing, you know?
>> Okay. So, for where to someone listening
to this who's not familiar with the
harms of standard of care, where is the
standard of care correct and what are
they doing, right? And then what are the
problems and downsides of standard of
care?
Well, I mean, you know, it's remarkable.
I always find it absolutely astonishing
that some people, human beings, can be
brutalized, poisoned, and irdiated and
surgically mutilated and still survive.
Um, uh, and we have we have, well, the
system will say, well, we have millions
of cancer survivors that have uh been
cured by the by the standards of care.
And that's true. But many many many of
these folks pay a ser significant price
for for that management. They have
neurossychiatric problems, digestive
problem, hormonal problem, bone density
problems, cardiovascular problems. You
go right down the list. And most of them
don't live a full life. They die later
on from some other uh co collateral
damage from whatever they've been
tasing. Um when we do metabolic therapy
uh these these people that do it
correctly uh they they get much
healthier. Uh they they all organs in
their body start to uh perform at a
higher at a at a higher physiological
level. Um because we're we're using
ketones which is a super fuel that
allows the cells to gain energy. Uh the
delta G prime hydra uh uh ATP hydraysis
is much more effective. We produce fewer
radicals. We make mitochondria healthy
in all the normal cells of our body
while we're degrading the tumor. I mean,
this is a win-win situation all around.
Now, but we also know that some parts of
the standard of care can be
significantly improved and made less
toxic by ma by dovetailing it with
metabolic management, metabolic therapy.
So, clearly the field is going to have
to readjust its entire way of doing
business uh if we want to keep people
healthy a and managed. And don't forget,
we don't ever claim cure. We just claim
uh effective management, uh non-toxic
management. You know, who can claim
we're going to cure cancer? Uh you don't
know. Okay, they say you've been having
you you you've been cancer-free for five
years, but then at five and a half
years, the tumor returns. So, you were
never really cured even using standards
of care. Now, some people do. How would
you know? If you die at 98 years old
when you had cancer at 35 and you died
from heart a heart attack, then
obviously you probably were cancer. But
but we don't know that. We just like to
know that we have a disorder that was
previously minimally managed without
with with toxicity. Now we might be able
to manage it better without toxicity and
and lead to a overall improved overall
survival, not this uh progressionfree
survival. They what they do is they
approve drugs based on progression free
survival. Uh which means that you you
give the drug and it looks like the
tumor is responding really well but you
don't live much longer. What the hell is
that? You you want to make sure overall
survival. Show me show me a guy like for
example glyopblasto almost everybody is
dead within three years almost. Every
now and then you get a rare survivor
that makes it to five years. If we make
five years the the average survival for
glyopblasto that changes the pattern
completely. So uh then you know you're
on the right track and this is what our
plan is not only for glyopblasto but for
all these different horrific metastatic
cancers.
>> Standard care chemo and radio
specifically I assume could harm the
mitochondria of the cell which could
lead to more cancer down the line if
they beat their first cancer. that
they've harmed the mitochondria through
the standard of care. Is there an
argument, if that's true, is there an
argument that being on uh in a ketogenic
state, which is good for your
mitochondria anyway would offset the
negative damages of standard care?
>> Well, I think so.
The problem is we need to do those kinds
of experiments and they're currently not
allowed to be done at at clinical
centers right now. Uh so you would have
uh for example you'd have standard of
care one one population of of people
would get standard of care which is what
everybody basically gets then you get
standard of care with metabolic therapy
and then you get metabolic therapy
without standard of care.
>> So you have u you have three different
groups and then you'd be able to clearly
determine to what extent um these would
be u effective. Now we are able to do in
glyopblasto we're able to do um standard
of we we do standard of care first and
then the tumor invariably recurs uh and
then they're then they're allowed to do
uh it on a metabolic therapy ketogenic
metabolic but never the way we've
designed it. No one has ever done a
clinical trial the way we think it
should be done and that's our big paper
from last week that tells you exactly
how you should do a clinical trial. The
problem is it's threatening. If it
works, what happens if these things
work? You you're going to have to change
the whole design of what we do for
cancer. Uh but god forbid anybody wants
to do the three groups and we turn out
that the metabolic therapy by itself is
superior to the standard of care. And
even the standard of care uh with
metabolic therapy, what's that going to
say? You know, who the hell wants to do
standard care anymore? But but uh but I
think it all could be worked out. I I
mean don't forget this is the we're at
the tip of the spear here at Boston
College. We're the ones that that did
all this and we're working it out all
the time. We have a very comprehensive
preclinical system. We we test all this
preclinally first and we only use
natural models. We don't use these
genetically engineered uh things. You
know they make all these animal models
for cancer there. The cancer cells are
genetically engineered. The mouse is
genetically engineered. I mean it's just
like what the hell are you doing? Use
natural t tumors natural tumors that
arose naturally in those hosts and then
you can design and perfect what you need
to do for doses timing and scheduling
and then you can bring that into the
clinic and modify uh pre-clinical
clinical back and forth back and forth
and perfect the system so you know
what's going to be maximally effective
for the cancer patients. Mhm. I I think
I read on my prep before this where u if
you're trying to naturally induce cancer
in a mouse to then study it, you were
trying to do this but you were calorie
restricting the mice and it was very
hard to actually implement some sort of
cancer in the mice if I if I read that
right.
>> Well well uh we we there's several you
know I've worked on this. We developed
natural models of brain cancer and
metastatic cancer. Um most of these
arose naturally in this one strain of
mouse. Now I also made a lot of models
putting chemical carcinogens into the
brain uh of mice and then you could get
uh tumors that arose. None of these
tumors that I ever made in the brain
were were um metastatic. They were
highly angiogenic. Uh they were not
metastatic, highly invasive. But then we
discovered the VM3 coming out of the VM
Dickerson strain of mouse out of
Edinburgh, Scotland. Uh they sent us
some mice. So we started to see these
spontaneous tumors uh brain cancer
tumors coming out of these mice
spontaneous we didn't do anything to
them they just developed naturally and
then we characterized the cell in the
tumor and it turned out to be a
macrofage a microgleotype cell and then
we went and did a a big study on all
human cancers and we found out that all
major human cancers have characteristics
of macrofasages or microglea
which is a cell that can spread around
your body. So we now know the biology of
metastasis which is the ultimate killer
of most people. Uh we know what the cell
is. We know the biology of the cell. So
what I did is I went back and I said
okay let's further evaluate the biology
of the macrofasage. And there's a couple
of guys at Oxford there the new the new
scols that who have done their their
work actually clued us to what we need
to do to manage metastatic cancer if you
can believe it. So they they they
interrogated uh macrofasages and found
out what they eat. what is the fuels
that drive macrofage biology and it
turns out to be glutamine. So glutamine
is a major fuel for macrofagages. So
what we did was we said well if all met
metastatic cancers have some
characteristics of macrofage. Warberg
clearly showed and we all everybody
knows glucose is already a a major fuel
but the glutamine came because we
understood that macrofasages which are
the origin of metastatic cancer need the
glutamine. So that's why we can manage
all these cancers whether it's a brain
tumor, colon tumor, breast, they all
they're all macroof they're all they're
all macrofage biology. So now you know
how to kill them and uh oh but if you
think it's a genetic disease then you
don't even listen to what I'm saying.
>> So you're you're out on left field
somewhere.
>> So with uh that perfectly segus into the
uh into the pulse section of the pulse
press methodology. So the the the press
is the continuous state in a ketogenic
diet, right? Which we'll get to after
which I'd love to explore. But the the
the pulse what firstly why the need to
pulse uh glutamine inhibitors and
secondly
>> well I think first of all the press it's
not just ketogenic diet it's the state
of of of um nutritional ketosis. You can
get into nutritional ketosis with
Mediterranean diets uh with carnivore
diets. uh with vegan diets is hard with
vegan diets, ve vegetarians and that
kind of stuff. Pescatarian diets,
whatever your glue you you get your GKI
down. I don't give a damn what you eat.
Uh people, oh, can I eat this? Oh,
seafood says you can't. I don't.
Seafruit says you eat whatever the hell
you want as long as you can keep your
GKI down. And then people will come to
know they're all different from each
other. Uh what you might be eat might be
somebody else can't eat that or
whatever. It doesn't say what what
should I eat. If you really want to
know, don't eat anything. Just drink
water. Get your B get your
>> So for those people say, "Oh, I can't do
that." Okay, then then you throw the
dice out.
>> Yeah,
>> it's hard. I'm not saying this is easy
stuff.
>> No, it's super hard. And GKR is a gluc
glucose ketone index which you you you
developed which is taking from my
understanding it's a ratio between your
blood levels of beta hydroxybutyrate and
contrast with your blood levels of
glucose. Is that right?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's in Millie
Mhler. So you can you can use the same
units to to make the division. And when
you get uh down into the uh like my
friend Dominic Di Austin Augustino, he's
always in a state of nutritional
ketosis. He lives in that he lives in
that zone. That was our ancestor. All of
our ancestors during the Paleolithic
period. We're always in nutritional
ketosis. They didn't have delicateessins
on every corner. They weren't eating
sugar-filled donuts. Uh they they were
very active people. Nutritional ketosis
is our natural state. This is our our
natural state. This is who we are as a
as a biology. So, uh, not being in
ketosis is an abnormal state.
>> We made the abnormal to be normal. We
made the abnormal and now we're
suffering from all these chronic
diseases as the result of it. So, um I
was going to ask you, but so yeah, you
you get your you get your body into
nutritional ketosis and then you pulse
the glutamine uh targeting and uh we
know uh as the Newcom said uh the uh the
glutamine is an essential nutrient for
macrofasages and the gut and the ura
cycle and all these very important
physiological conditions in our body.
When people are burned, you have to give
them high doses of glutamine because the
macrofasages kill the bacteria that
enter into our system. We have a we have
a powerful immune system that will kill
bacteria and and that's those
macrofasages that kill the entering
bacteria uh or wounds or this kind of
thing uh need the glutamine. So um so
you have to be very very careful. So you
if you if you know your metastatic tumor
cell which is an immune cell uh a
macrofage or a luccoyite of one of these
types they know that tumor cell needs
the glutamine as much as the normal gut
needs the glutamine as much as our
normal immune system need the glutamine.
So what we find is that when we use
glutamine targeting drugs they kill
cancer cells but they paralyze the
immune system. uh they don't kill the
immune system, they just paralyze it. So
if you kill a lot of cancer cells, uh
one of the functions of our M2
macrofagages, one of the populations is
to pick up dead cells and gobble them up
and and get rid of the get rid of the
the the dead cells in the micro
environment. You can't let let a bunch
of dead cancer cells hang around. You
need an active immune system to come in
and clean up the mess. So you have to
pulse. You cannot uh uh uh continually
use glutamine targeting drugs. Yes,
you'll kill tumor cells, but you'll also
paralyze our own immune system and screw
up our gut and our ura cycle. You'll do
a a lot of other physiological changes.
So, that's why do dosage, timing, and
scheduling is what the tip is the is the
cutting edge
>> of cancer research right now for me. I
don't know what the rest of the world is
doing. For them, they're they're out on
left field somewhere. So, um, let me
just say th that what I've just said is
not what we call sexy science. Wow, this
is sexy. Doses, timing, and scheduling.
No, it's not. It gets the job done, but
it ain't sexy.
>> Well, who who cares, right? It gets the
job done. How was your how you invented
the pro press pulse protocol with your
colleagues as you allude to and then
your most recent paper as well is it it
shows uh the implementation of it with
specifically blastoomas. How has the pro
press pulse protocol changed since you
developed it and what is this leading uh
edge you you just alluded to there with
regards to dosage timing and scheduling?
>> Well, press pulse hasn't really changed.
We we know what we do because we have to
press glucose down which is not toxic.
It was just different ways to do it.
What what what we're learning is there's
different different strategies to to do
what the the press pulled. You have to
realize where where did this come from
um in the first place? Where where do we
get the idea pressed? This comes from
the the area of paleobiology.
Okay. uh during the uh history of our
earth uh we've had massive extinctions
of organisms over o over the eons. Okay.
And this didn't happen by any one event.
It happened by a combination of two
events. There was a chronic stress on
populations from some change I in in in
the environment followed by an acute
pulse like a meteor strike or in a
series of many volcanoes going off at
similar time and that led to mass
extinction of organisms on the history
of our earth. So we just took the same
concept and put it into managing cancer.
So you you press down and make a a a
stress on the whole body uh uh putting
putting the cancer cells at a
competitive disadvantage
and then you come in and you give them
the uh the final shot in the head uh
with the glutamine targeting and uh but
it has to be done very strategically and
and the ways that we're going to do this
is going to be really nifty and and and
and interesting because there's so many
different ways we use embar medications
It turns out parasites and cancer cells
use common metabolic pathways to get
energy. So we can we have a whole slug
of these different drugs that could be
used in the right way. You can't believe
how many ways that we can kill cancer
cells without harming the rest of the
body. It's absolutely unbelievable.
>> Unfortunately,
when you think cancer is a genetic
disease, you're not even listening to
what I'm saying. You're hunting for
you're on the constant hunt for genes
that don't exist.
Yes. Yes. Okay. Let's get into those
then. So, what are the most promising uh
glutamine inhibitors or glutamine
blockers and what are the most
accessible?
>> Well, this is the another great tragedy.
The most the most powerful one is is Don
60 oxyorucine
which has been kicked around for a long
time. Was used on little kids. It was
used on on cancer patients years ago.
It's an antibiotic
um uh from a staff strep. I think it was
isolated at one point and they didn't
know how to use it. They dump large
doses on these poor cancer patients
without targeting the glucose. I mean,
if you don't know what you're doing or
how you're doing it, then the outcome
will never be optimal. So, so we now
know what we need to do uh with this.
Yes. And then the drug companies all
come in with their glutamine targeting
drugs just so they can make a profit. I
I said, "What are you interested in? The
profit or the outcome of the patient?"
Of course, it's the profit, not the
outcome of the patient. So, I said, to
really manage it, you got to put the
patient in nutritional ketosis, then
come in with your special drugs and see
how it works. But they said, "Oh, that
but if if we won't know if it's the if
it's the if it's the glut glucose
targeting or our drug that's I said, who
gives a damn? The patient is going to be
the benefici beneficiary of this. Oh,
no, we can't do that." So, the whole
system, the structure of the the
pharmaceutical industry and trying to
build their drugs is is all screwed up.
So you you have to come in with the
outcome of what's going to be the best
for this patient. Can my new drug work
effectively with nutritional ketosis and
make it better than nutritional ketosis
without toxicity? And the answer is the
pharmaceutical companies are all over
this kind of a concept. It's just that
they won't do it with nutritional
ketosis until somebody tells them to do
that.
>> But uh but that's going to be the
future. So, yes, there's going to be a
lot of drugs potentially liked on uh the
D O N. Um why is it not available? Uh
oh, they said it was too toxic. What are
you kidding me? Relative to doc Rubeson
and all these other things that we have
out there. I mean uh it's not that
should be that should be a prime drug in
in the drug industry is is on should be
there and delivered under nutritional
ketosis. You're going to get some
tremendous uh outcome from this. So a
big problem I've come across with um
people I know who have cancer who are
trying to implement this is a they can't
get DOM right they're measuring the GI
all good they're going through standard
of care as well they can't get DOM
>> but yet there's some efficacy in
research um I found found a good paper
on ECGC found a good paper on bourberine
milk thistle show potential as effective
glutamine blockers are these viable uh
options for people who can't find dom
Well, they're they're they're not going
to harm and and in some cases they do
help. Uh but they're they're minor.
They're they're not the big dog. They're
not the big stick.
>> Uh why are you not allowed to use the
big stick? Uh why yes, bourberine and
these other thing. We have all that in
the pre and the in the in the fleshed
out pressed pulse. Uh these are
supplements that could work together
with the uh with the different options
for sure. We don't we don't uh uh
discourage the use of those what you
just mentioned, but some of the parasite
medications are are even more powerful
and they don't and they're also very
non-toxic. So the question is how you
get all this together. The the the issue
here is yes, if we had access to Dawn,
which should be I have no idea why the
government why this every people should
be marching in the streets for this
stuff. I don't why why the most powerful
drugs are not being used uh and they're
putting this other crap on top of us,
you know, it's like what the hell is
going on here? So, um but but any event,
yes. So, you have to do the combos. Uh
now, the other thing too is many cancer
patients start to realize metabolic
therapy only after all of their toxic
treatments are not working. Um they say,
"Oh, okay. Standard of care in my case
didn't work. My tumor is recurring. Uh
sometimes they say there's nothing more
we can do. Uh we've done everything, you
know. Uh why why did you go in that
direction in the first place? The first
thing you do is is get your body into
nutritional ketosis. Don't worry. But
this is the thing. Lack of knowledge.
>> Uh scientific illiteracy. This is a a
plague that our our species already has.
So, you're not uh you you and and and
listen, most people always trust their
physician because they're supposed to
know. But in the case of cancer, they
don't know. Most of them have no clue.
Not all of them. Most of them think
glucose or eat anything you want to eat.
What are you kidding me? These guys
don't read the scientific literally.
They understand the biology. I mean,
this is nuts. But anyway, so this is the
training.
>> Yeah.
>> So, I was going to say it's hard when
you go to a oncology ward and it's just
full of glucose everywhere. It just
seems almost amoral when you're walking
around it. Um, so could you what is the
specific uh parasite drug? Just uh
before we
>> Well, you have you have a bunch of them.
Um, you know, uh, you have Mbendazol,
Fenbendazol,
Ivormectin might work on this case.
There's there's a number of them. Um,
Simon U, uh, from uh, St. Lewis,
Missouri has studied a whole bunch of
these parasite medications and and
people say, "Well, why are you doing
that?" And uh parasite medications
target the substrate mitochondrial
substrate level phosphorilation, which
is the discovery that that we made that
how how this is a very interesting thing
is that the glutamine is fermented in
the mitochondria dumping out suinic
acid. So it it so it makes look like the
mitochondria healthy. Uh but the gluten
it's not respired, it's fermented.
That's the big thing. It's a ferment
amino acid fermentation.
>> Let me give you an example. It's
unbelievable. If people have heart
attacks and many people do uh if he's no
longer breathing because his heart
stopped, his blood immediately fills up
with glucose and glutam uh correction.
his bloodstream fills up with lactic
acid and suxinic acid uh as soon as the
the heart attack happens. Lactic acid is
the waste product of of um substrate
level phosphorilation in the glycolysis
pathway of the cytoplasm of the cell
because the mitochondria aren't working
because there's no oxygen. So pyuvate is
reduced to lactate to produce give us
some energy out of the out of the the
cytoplasm. At the same time, glutamine,
the most abundant amino acid in the
body, is being fermented very rapidly
with suxinic acid as the waste product
of that fermentation metabolism. So that
tells us these the difference as soon as
you start breathing again, the lactic
acid and suinic acid disappear from your
bloodstream because your mitochondria
are back on track again. Cancer cells
are locked into this fermentation
metabolism whether or not oxygen is
present in the environment. Very clear.
These cancer cells have been telling us
for decades what is wrong with them. The
cancer has been screaming at us saying I
am living on fermentation. If you take
away my fermentation you will kill me.
The cancer cells have been telling us
that for decades and we have chosen not
to listen to them.
>> Well well hopefully we're in
>> it's it's it's really interesting. I
mean it's a new rabbit hole for me as of
the last six months and it just seems it
seems bizarre why people aren't codling
on. However, your two recent papers, I
guess, make a very big uh contribution
in making this more widely accessible
and mainstream. Tell could you tell us
about the the two recent papers?
>> Well, it they will make they'll make a a
difference if people actually read them.
You know, the the problem is the the
people who should be reading them aren't
reading them. So, so that the status the
status quo continues. Now the fir the
first paper we just published was um
amino acid and glucose fermentation are
driving the disregulated growth of brain
tumor cells. So we used the human and
mouse uh brain cancers and they they're
both driven by this fermentation
metabolism. And then how did we know
glutamine was the one? We interrogated
uh these tumor cells. So we listen to
this. You you take you take the the
cells and you grow them in culture uh
and you don't let them you just grow
them in saline sol salt solution uh
buffered a buffered salt solution and
they die there's no food the the cells
are all dead after about 24 48 hours and
then you just add fuels back one at a
time one at a time one amino acid
another only one only one do the
experiment and you find out that when
you add the glutamine boom these damn
cells get all excited they start living
again so um so clearly They don't die.
Glutamine prevented death. Uh and we
went through all the different amino
acids. Yes. Asparagene. Yes. A little
glutamate. Yes. There's a little But
then in vivo in back in the tumor, you
have to say, well, what are the what are
the fuels that are present in sufficient
quantity in the micro environment that
would allow the cell the tumor cell to
survive? And it's glutamine. It's
abundant everywhere. So yes, tumor cells
can burn up a little of these other
amino acids, but there's tiny amounts.
They'll go through it like real quick
and there's nothing left for them. And
then we go through the sugars. Yes,
there's a uh mostly glucose, but but the
sorbball. Nobody sorbos. That's no.
Sorbos never exists in our body anyway.
Um and then you have a little bit of
urodine. Yeah, there's a little bit of
urodine in the micro environment, but
again, it's not going to drive the
disregulated growth of these tumor
cells. So clearly, we've interrogated
what the tumor cells need. And then we
go in vivo and we target the glucose and
glutamine simultaneously while the isn't
these damn tumor cells at the dion. So
uh clearly we've worked out the science.
We've worked out it. We just haven't
perfected it as effectively as we would
want in the clinic. So that again dosage
timing and scheduling unsexy science
will ultimately be the strategy uh
perfected for managing cancer in most
people.
>> Okay. and and the second paper
>> that was our that was our first P. So
that paper uh follows up on Warberg
studies. Warberg did not know about
glutamine fermentation. So uh the other
thing too is we showed that tumor cells
consume oxygen avidly. Uh but it's not
linked to ATP synthesis through
oxidative phosphorilation. It's used for
other things not not that. So that that
led you if you go into the scientific
literature today every many many folks
will say Warberg was wrong because tumor
cells consume oxygen. Even Warberg made
the same mistake. He thought oxygen
consumption in tumor cells which was low
was still linked to oxidative
phosphorilation. We have shown that is
not the case. There's a disconnect. The
tumor cells are consuming oxygen but not
for oxidative phosphorilation is
significant. Maybe a little bit but not
not not a lot. So that was a big
discovery. uh the fact that amino acids
can be fermented in the mitochondria,
the fact that oxygen consumption is not
linked to sign sufficient ATP synthesis
through oxidative phosphorilation now
clears up all of the mess that Warberg
was uh struggling with.
>> Are you passionate about the
groundbreaking and heroic research of
Dr. Thomas Cipher on metabolic therapy
and cancer? So are we. That's why we've
created something special for you in
collaboration with Johnny Rockermeer, a
German book publisher and translator.
Introducing our collection of
meticulously crafted books that distill
the essence of Dr. Safe Reed's work.
Dive into the science and discoveries.
These summary books are your gateway to
understanding the intricate world of
metabolic ketogenic therapy in a clear,
concise, and engaging way. Whether
you're new to the subject or a seasoned
enthusiast, our books offer insights
that can change your life. Ready to
explore this transformative knowledge?
Visit our website at www.cancer as a
metabolic disease.com to get your copy.
You can buy the ebook there directly and
the paperbook via the provided links.
Here's the best part. A portion of every
purchase goes directly to support Dr.
Thomas Safereed's groundbreaking
research. That's why the direct ebook
purchase is the best option to donate as
much as possible. You can see all of the
donations Mr. Rocker has already made at
www. ketoforcancer.net.
That's right. When you buy our books,
you're not just
>> We also showed that the amount of lactic
acid Warberg Warberg pigeon pigeon holed
himself by being rigid with his
quantifications
uh rigid quantification. And we have now
shown that those that those uh rigid
quantifications were inaccurate. And
this led to a lot of controversy uh
about cancer. Was he correct about the
origin of cancer? Absolutely. Was he
correct? He just didn't have all of the
the the details fleshed out and this led
to an explosion of misinformation and
the the shift of cancer metab over to
the gen the genetics. So they said, "Oh,
these biochemists don't know what the
hell they're doing. There's a lot of
fights with Warberg and everything." Now
we see all these mutations. So for the
last 75 years we've been chasing genes
and the genes are all downstream
epiphenomen of the metabolism of the
cancer cell. So that's why we haven't
made any advances in this whole cancer
field.
>> So now we bring the whole train back on
track, clean up the the the
misunderstanding that Warberg and others
have had and now we can move forward
with the correct way to manage cancer in
a non-toxic way. Yes. So that paper then
presents the strongest evidence to say
that there's an amino acid fermentation
driving driving these cancers. And
they're all the same. All cancers are
the are very similar. They they have a
damaged mitochondria and they need
glucose and glutamine fermentation to
drive the disregulated growth. Whether
it's a brain cancer, colon cancer,
breast cancer, melanoma, doesn't make
any difference. They all have the same
problem. So they're all the same. Yeah.
NIH says, "Oh no, cancer is a hundred
different diseases." No, it's not. It's
a single disease a metabolic problem.
Now the the second major paper where we
have a lot of other co-authors MDs and
PhDs on this on this paper uh discusses
how we strategize this whole concept
into the clinic. How how do we how do we
how do we take the basic science of
understanding of the problem and now and
now uh perfect this for a clinical
application. So that's step two. Step
one is you have rock solid science to
say why we're doing this. Step two is is
manage now bringing it into the clinic
and making it work in clinical trials.
But right now people say, "Oh, I can't
believe it unless you do a clinical
trial." Well, we would love to do a
clinical trial. Problem is, nobody's
educated to know how to do this. Uh Dr.
Durier, myself, and a few others can do
it, but the vast majority have no clue.
what I just told you is is unknown to
the majority of oncology clinics
anywhere on the planet. So, you have to
train uh physicians. You have to know
how to do this what I just said. And
then you have to select compliant
people. You just can't grab guys off the
street and say, "Hey, you know, do all
this stuff. He won't know what to do,
why he's doing it." You've got to you've
got to get a a compliant group of
people. And you have to follow them. and
you have to follow them and prove
unambiguously that this is the way
you're going to manage cancer. Then all
of a sudden it'll explode and and people
will be trained and everybody will know
what and how to do to the best of their
ability. But this is a work in progress.
But we have the platform. The bedrock is
here. We just have to work uh and move
this field forward.
>> Well, hopefully we can get the message
out. Um just a few quickfire questions
to uh to to end us off if if that's all
good with you.
Yeah.
>> Um the the the first is do you believe
most diseases are metabolic in nature?
>> Um well I think that's a very good
question. Uh I think a lot of them are
uh with the with the exception of rare
inherited mutations like cystic fibrosis
you know um um tay-ax disease
Huntington's disease um you know these
are gene driven causes of of these are
called inborn errors of metabolism and
this kind of thing but most chronic
diseases absolutely affect the ability
of our cells they throw us out of
metabolic homeostasis is metabolic
homeostasis is driven by the efficiency
of the mitochondrial networks within
within our cells. Um uh entropy which is
the second law of thermodynamics is
ultimately leads to the demise of of all
of us. We don't we don't live forever.
uh we end we undergo disorder and it's
the disorder that eventually leads to
the shutdown of our entire phys physi
physiology and um what metabolic therapy
does is keeps mitochondria healthy so
that we re all we do is delay the second
law of thermodynamics. We're just simply
delaying entropy. Uh eventually uh when
we die and if we die under natural
causes our entire energy system shuts
down over a very short period of time uh
our our network of of of main
maintaining
uh ionic gradients across membranes we
reach equilibrium and when we reach
equilibrium we're dead you know uh
that's the natural way we die. uh but by
abusing our our metabolism, we put
ourselves at risk uh for in elevated or
increased entropy, second law, and we
die sooner or if we or if they try to
keep us alive, we live longer in a in a
in a very unhealthy state. So, you like
to live as long as you possibly can. And
listen, I'm not deprive of telling
people they can't eat uh uh sweets and
and and eat pizza and drink Coca-Cola
and whiskey and beer and all the stuff
that we we enjoy in our lives. But I I
just think we have to be cautious that
uh chronic abuse of our body will will
mother nature will let us know in no
certain terms uh uh and the
mitochondrial network will let us know
in no uncertain terms what what we need
to do. But you also have to realize the
body is an incredible healing machine.
If you allow it to get back on track,
you can deal with a lot of these things.
That's why therapeutic fasting, water
only fasting was always considered a way
to re uh you know uh reset the the
metabolic uh thermostat in your body. Um
so there's a lot of ways we can do this
if we are knowledgeable to know how to
do this. Uh the pro the problem is you
need to you need to have this
understanding.
>> Yes, there's a lot of foundational
knowledge needed. So with that in mind,
would um would the press pulse protocol
be a viable
implementation or uh lack of a better
word, would it a viable protocol to
mitigate against other chronic diseases
or help manage other chronic diseases?
>> Well, I I think for for type 2 diabetes
for sure because there are there's clear
evidence that type 2 diabetes can be
cured uh uh with with diet and exercise
alone. you don't need all these other
but of course people don't want to do
that so they love to take um whatever
those drugs are that that make you get
get rid of the diabetes I don't know
what the long-term consequences of that
now for Alzheimer's disease you know I
would say 40 to 50% of all maybe even
more Alzheimer's is the result of uh of
damage to mitochondria in your in your
neurons the problem of course with m
Alzheimer's disease when your neurons
die you don't make new neurons so uh you
don't regenerate new neurons and if you
do they're they're they're blank slates.
There's no memory associated uh with
that. So I I you know again Alzheimer's
disease could be uh prevented or delayed
for sure. Type 2 diabetes could be
cured. A lot of cardiovascular disease
could definitely be eliminated. Uh
cancer for sure. uh all the chronic
diseases have have have have of have of
have of have of have of have of have of
have of have of have of have of have a
linkage to destabilized uh energetic
homeostasis which is basically
mitochondrial function.
Okay. Well, that's a that's a very
hopeful message. Um,
well question quickly from me. Um, last
question for me because I appreciate we
got to go over time is what contrarian
belief do you believe within your field
of mitochondria is a metabolic disease,
cancer is a metabolic mitochondrian
belief do you believe that other people
in your specific field would disagree
with you on?
Um well
I I think we'd have to discuss that uh
first and find out what part of the
disagreement is is there uh like what
what would they disagree about because
you know the the the work of of of the
late uh Richard Vch clearly showed uh
the bioenergetic capacity of the ketone
body uh and how and how it it can
enhance mitochondrial function. um you
know I mean the discussion about cancer
as a genetic disease I think any
rational mind looking at the data would
have to agree that it can't be a genetic
disease based on the information that I
gave you uh but you know scientific
debates and discussion are absolutely
essential um for fleshing out uh
disagreements not only disagreements
interpretation of data um how you design
an experiment and interpret the data
because we can have two we can have the
uh facts the facts are this is what
develops theories in the sense of
understanding. It's how you interpret
the facts of the data that you collect
from designed experiments and and at at
at first there might be controversy as
to how you interpret the facts. Uh uh
but we don't deny the fact. We just we
just have disagreements on how we
interpret the the facts. And that's
that's how science moves forward. we we
have to we have to have a consensus on
how we interpret the facts uh that we
collect and that's how we move fields
forward. So there's always a
disagreement always a disagreement on
how we interpret the facts but that's
okay that's normal that's a normal
process of science and that's how we the
fields move forward uh when we all come
to a better understanding of how we
interpret the facts and act upon them.
So um but yeah I I I mean I'm have
debates with people and discussions with
people and uh we come to a a consensus
and there's some things that I I miss
myself and I said yeah that's a very
excellent point we should incorporate
that and and look more into it. So
that's the way the field moves forward
that way. If any people be willing more
willing to change their mind, right?
More more in the spirit of Darwin like
kill your best loved ideas when the
facts disagree, right?
>> Yeah. Well, that's I mean we can all
disagree, but we eventually we come to
to realize I mean look at the
disagreement that they had about the
geocentric heliocentric movement of the
planets. I mean for 1800 years people
thought the the the the sun revolved
around the earth and the planets all
revound revol revolved around
capernician idea was not with met was
met with great hostility. So um uh it
takes time for the field to come to re
recognizing the facts of things.
>> Let's see the time discovers truth
right. So very hopeful. Um Dr. Safford
thank you so much for for that episode.
It was really really wonderful. Before
you go, I'd love to just um give an
opportunity to uh for where our
listeners can find more of your work. I
know your Twitter is good for keeping up
with your papers. Um any other resources
which might be helpful would be
beneficial as well.
>> Yeah. So um that's a very good point and
I don't forget I've written only one
book, Cancer is a Metabolic Disease. I
did not write these summaries that my
name is attached to. I I people should
know that they come out and they say,
"Oh, you know, I read your summary." I
didn't write a summary. They put my name
on these summaries, make it look like I
wrote it. I didn't write that. I only
wrote one book by in the John John Wy
press. Uh, and I apologize for it how
expensive it is. I I try to tell them,
please don't make it so expensive, but
they don't listen. So, they they're a
textbook uh and they're also a
scientific credibility organization as
well. But you have to realize another
thing. Uh our research is supported
predominantly by private foundations and
philanthropy. Um we received a very nice
gr uh grant from uh United Kingdom
Childhood Cancer Foundation that helped
us develop therapies for pediatric
high-grade glomomas. Uh we're very very
appreciative of the UK uh for supporting
our our work in that regard. And then we
have other foundations. Travis
foundations of cancer metabolic uh
treatments supports our work. And then
people make donations directly to my
university, Boston College here in in
Boston. And they have a cancer fund uh
set up so that so that folks that want
to move this field forward as quickly as
possible can make direct donations to
the university. my the there's a place
on my website on the bo on the biology
department where they can go down and
and donate directly to me through
through the university. So, um uh and
then the university sets up a a fund to
support our research based on philan
philanthropic donations and and these
other private foundations that that that
support our work. So, so this is the way
it has to move if you really want to
make the difference. It has to be mostly
philanthropy because the the the
strategy that we take is is not well
received by the major granting agencies.
Uh when you say it's a metabolic disease
and not a not a genetic disease, they
have a tendency to be a little bit less
enthusiastic. But but that's okay. It's
going to change. It's going to change.
>> Just on that, how much funding goes to
the genetic theory of cancer over a year
versus the metabolic? Well, let's let's
look at the the NIH webs uh the n NCI n
national cancer institute I think like7
billion dollars something like this um I
would say a good 50% of it is going to
uh chasing genes um so imotherapies and
and this kind of stuff all based on the
sematic mutation theory uh so and it's
the same in UK it's the same in all
these different countries Germany
they're all they're all chasing genes
not all of them. But but that seems to
be the strategy. Um so uh so that that
that's uh one of the one of the
unfortunate uh things. But but they'll
they'll all come to know uh at some
point uh that if you want to avoid
cancer and manage it effectively, you're
going to have to use metabolic a
metabolic approach. Um so so yeah, we're
very we're very uh appreciative of those
folks. And the other thing that I do is
if you look at the papers that we
published the the two papers you see
acknowledgements
uh uh and you say who are all these
people
in the acknowledgement section they're
the folks that are giving us the money
the the organizations are the folks that
give us money. There are some people
believe it or not uh that just want to
be part of the movement and they just
want to say I gave this guy money and
this look at he he acknowledged me on
the bottom of his paper. Like you could
say, "Who are all these names of people
and organizations?" Well, they're the
ones who support our research. And if
they'd like us to acknowledge them, I'd
be more than happy to include their
their name as a supportive of this of
this new movement to manage cancer. So,
they get some of these guys get excited
and say, "Oh, I want to I want to
support this. Let me let me let me give
the money to this." And uh so, you know,
you're you're giving the money to the
right the right organization, the right
the right approach to managing cancer.
That's for sure.
>> Wonderful. Well, what we'll do is we'll
put all the links you just described in
the show notes so people can go and
donate if they'd like to. Uh we'll put
links to your book. We'll put your links
to your Twitter and um yeah, just from
our side, thank you so much. Really, it
was a real privilege to sit down with
you and uh learned a load. So, thanks
for coming on.
>> Yeah. Well, thank you very much. It was
a pleasure.